---
title: "Why Butterflies Have Different Patterns?"
des: "Butterfly wings are always fascinating. Every wondered why there are so many diverse kinds of patterns seen on them?"
askedBy: "Siri E. D. from Pramati Hillview Academy, Mysuru"
postDate: "2023-07-21"
featureImg: "/assets/images/iaw_characters.jpeg"
author: "Asif Khan"
tags: ["question", "listener-question", "pramati-hillview-academy"]
---
Beautiful butterflies and their intricate wing patterns! Have you ever wondered why they have different patterns on each wing? This is an asymmetry which is present in various organisms. The same applies to butterflies, whose patterns vary from wing to wing.

### But first comes the question, why do butterflies have patterns at all? 
For attracting mates: Colours and intricate design patterns act as visual signals. They indicate an individual's fitness and reproductive potential. By showcasing their beauty, butterflies increase their chances of successfully finding a mate.

For recognising species: These patterns aid in avoiding mating with incompatible partners. By having unique and recognisable patterns, butterflies ensure they can find and reproduce with individuals of their species.

For camouflage: Some butterfly species evolved patterns that blend in with their surroundings, such as leaves or tree bark, making it challenging for predators to spot them. This increases their chances of survival.

### And who makes these patterns possible in butterflies??
Genetics! As you might have guessed! Genes (or specific butterfly DNA), complex regulatory sequences and signalling pathways all play a role in producing the patterns. The turning on and off specific genes can give butterflies different colours in different regions. The specialised gene family responsible for the side-specific wing pattern is also known for creating wings in beetles and the hands and legs of vertebrates. Seems like an important gene! Scientists are still studying the influence of this gene. 

### Now, are both sides of the butterfly wing equally coloured?
It is fascinating to note that the top (dorsal) side of a butterfly's wing is vibrant, attracting mates and warning predators. The bottom (ventral side) often appears muted, so the butterfly does not attract unwanted attention when sitting in one place! Ain’t that a smart strategy?

Now that you know the reason for butterfly wing patterns, take your magnifying glasses and run to the nearest gardens! You might just find that butterfly wing patterns are also asymmetric! 
